\input texinfo

@setfilename dv-file-format.info
@settitle DV specs

@documentencoding UTF-8

@copying
Copyright (C) 2014 Carnë Draug / David Miguel Susano Pinto

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
@end quotation

@end copying

@titlepage
@title DeltaVision file format
@subtitle Specifications for the DV file format; a bastardized and proprietary version of MRC
@author Carnë Draug / David Miguel Susano Pinto

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top DeltaVision file format

This manual describes the DeltaVision (DV) file format to the best of public
knowledge.  DV is a proprietary format with no official public specifications.
This document is @emph{not} official and derives the specification from
study of the original MRC file format, reverse engineering of DV files,
and study of free software capable of handling DV files.

@end ifnottex

@node Intro
@chapter Introduction

@section History

@section Known limitations

Since it is based on the MRC file format, the DV format inherits all of its
limitations, the most significant among them being:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Limited to five wavelengths (although this can be mitigated in the extended
header);

@item
Only one voxel size per file.  The implication of this is that each file
should only have images from a single camera or from cameras with the same
physical pixel size.  However, this seems to be mostly ignored by the OMX
system.
@end itemize

In addition, by being a proprietary format with no public specification,
reading and writing of DV files is only fully supported by SoftWoRx.  By
being very similar to MRC, several libraries exist that are capable of
handling the image data but only part of its metadata.  The end result is
that programs relying only this format, such as the majority of SoftWoRx,
are a major issue for the interoperability between processing steps.

The bioformats project
has @uref{http://www.openmicroscopy.org/site/support/bio-formats5/formats/deltavision.html, received specifications}
for this format but is unable to share them.  They claim to have support for
@uref{http://www.openmicroscopy.org/site/support/bio-formats5/formats/deltavision-metadata.html, all 52 fields}
but these are the fields that they know exist.

@chapter File specification

@section Overview

@section Magic Number

A DV file can be identified by its 2 byte magic number, which is offsetted
by 96 bytes with respect to the beginning of file.  The DV magic number is
also used to identify the byte order within the file:

@table @asis
@item Big endian
@samp{0xc0a0} or @samp{-24384} as signed short integer (16-bit).

@item Little endian
@samp{0xc0a0} or @samp{-16224} as signed short integer (16-bit).
@end table


@section Initial Header

The initial header was inherited from the MRC and is mostly documented.  It
has a fixed size of 1024 bytes, and defines most of the rawest image data
details.  Most important, it defines the byte order, pixel size, image size,
and start of the actual image data.  It also contains information to interpret
the extended header.

@section Extended Header

The extended header is an optional section of the file.  It is defined in
the initial header, the values of @samp{next} (bytes 93--96) and
@samp{nspg} (bytes 89--92) defining its length, and layout.  This section
is completely undocumented.

@section Image Data


The image data is in a single array, row-major, but upside-down, i.e., the
first pixel value is the bottom left pixel of the image, followed by all the
other pixel values on the image bottom row.  The pixels for the XY 2D images
are stored contiguously, but their order, with respect to the other dimensions,
is specified on the initial header.

@section Sub-Resolution Image Data

The sub-resolution image is an optional section.  It contains a smaller
version of the image data, meant for faster display of thumbnails.

@appendix DeltaVision Objective Lens

@c We also have data on each lenses PN and Applied Precision's PN but they're
@c not that important and the table is already too large. If we want those
@c values, that would require a separate table for them.

@multitable @columnfractions .06 .44 .16 .12 .12 .12
@headitem ID
@tab Description
@tab Magnification
@tab Focal length (mm)
@tab Working distance (mm)
@tab Type

@c File is generated automatically
@include dv-lenses.texi

@end multitable


@node Index
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@bye
